docs: for state-transition tests, clarify about immutability and reusing state (#2153)
canonical/operator: docs/howto/write-unit-tests-for-a-charm.md

If you use pytest, you should put the `my_charm` fixture in a top level `conftest.py`, as it will likely be shared between all your unit tests.
```

## Reusing state

> Try to make each test an isolated test of a particular event handler. After checking the `State` that `ctx.run` returns, you shouldn't need to reuse the `State` as input to another event handler.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this paragraph. It's not inherently wrong to chain, like:

```python
st1 = ctx.run(ctx.on.config_changed(), st0)
assert s1...
st2 = ctx.run(ctx.on.start(), st1)
assert s2...
```

We suggest that typically each test is a testing a single event, but it doesn't have to.

It's also fine to have a state and re-use it to evaluate what happens with different events. For example, a State that's an expected stable state (maybe a fixture) and asserting that you end up with an output state regardless of event order.

> However, if you do need to reuse a `State`, don't try to modify the `State`. In general, the objects in a `State` are immutable. To reuse a `State`, create a `State` with the required data. For example:

Author: I'm not explaining why you'd want to reuse a State - ie why would you want to run more than one event? I don't know what's best to write here. We can add more explanation if needed.

```python
state_out = ctx.run(...)  # The State we want to reuse.
relation = state_out.get_relation(...)  # A relation we want to modify.

# Copy and modify the relation data.

> new_local_app_data = local_app_data.copy()

Reviewer 2: I know it's just an example, but it seems like it would be nice to show where `local_all_data` comes from.

Author: Whoops, thanks for catching! I've corrected the line:

```
new_local_app_data = relation.local_app_data.copy()
```

new_local_app_data["foo"] = "bar"

# Create a new State.
new_relation = dataclasses.replace(relation, local_app_data=new_local_app_data)

> new_state = dataclasses.replace(state_out, relations={new_relation})

Reviewer 3: I wonder about `import dataclasses; dataclasses.replace(...)` vs. `from dataclasses import replace; replace(...)`.

Our style guide prefers the earlier, and it's fine when replacing one or two things.

But if we recommend this, then I guess there would be many replacements in a give test file, making it pretty verbose, unnecessarily explicit.

Author: I see what you mean. In this instance, I'm OK with keeping `dataclasses.replace`, as we're not showing any imports, so I think it's clearer this way.

If you use pytest, you should put the `my_charm` fixture in a top level `conftest.py`, as it will likely be shared between all your unit tests.
```

## Reusing state

> Each test is typically an isolated test of a single event handler. If you need to use the same input state for several events, we recommend using a fixture that produces the input state. For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each test is typically an isolated test of a single state transition. If you need to use the same input state for several events, we recommend using a fixture that produces the input state. For example:
```

"event handler" is a thing in Ops, and a charm can and does have multiple attached to a single Juju event or Ops lifecycle event.

```python
@pytest.fixture

> def state_normal():

Reviewer 3: Minor: normal_state would read more naturally, though still makes someone wonder what normal means. I’d personally call it good state or quiescent state or perhaps something precise like leader_configured_state or workload_running_state…

That being said, I’m ok with merging in the current form too.

    container = testing.Container("some-container", can_connect=True)
    return testing.State(
        containers={container},
        config={"server-port": 8080},
        leader=True,
    )

def test_config_changed(state_normal):
    ctx = testing.Context(Charm)
    state_out = ctx.run(ctx.on.config_changed(), state_normal)
    # Check the output state.

> def test_status(state_normal):

Reviewer 3: Update status is a very special event. If we use it, we have to be clear that this is used as a kludge for Delta charms not being able to process the actual juju event previously at that point in time.

What bothers me is that we are suggesting our users to cover all of events that they subscribe to. Which would be a form of useless coverage in unit testing. What we should be doing instead is to steer them towards testing interesting state transitions.

    ctx = testing.Context(Charm)
    state_out = ctx.run(ctx.on.update_status(), state_normal)
    # Check the output state.
```

Sometimes it's more convenient to test several event handlers in the same function. For example, to check what happens when your charm receives events in a particular order.

> After checking a `State` object that `ctx.run` returns, you can provide the same state as input to another event handler. If you need to modify the state between the event handlers, create a new `State` object instead of modifying the original `State` object. For example:

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what to change "event handlers" to, but change we must.

If you use pytest, you should put the `my_charm` fixture in a top level `conftest.py`, as it will likely be shared between all your unit tests.
```

## Reuse state

Each test is typically an isolated test of how your charm responds to a single event. However, sometimes it's more convenient to simulate several events in the same test. For example, to check what happens when your charm receives events in a particular order.

After checking a `State` object that `ctx.run` returns, you can provide the same state as input to another simulated event. If you need to modify the state between the events, create a new `State` object instead of modifying the original `State` object. For example:

```python
state_out = ctx.run(...)  # The State we want to reuse.
relation = state_out.get_relation(...)  # A relation we want to modify.

# Copy and modify the relation data.
new_local_app_data = relation.local_app_data.copy()
new_local_app_data["foo"] = "bar"

# Create a new State.
new_relation = dataclasses.replace(relation, local_app_data=new_local_app_data)

> new_state = dataclasses.replace(state_out, relations={new_relation})

Author: Why not a set with one element? That's still a set of relations. Copilot is wrong here.
